  Zimbabwe: DISABLED PERSONS ACT, 1992    
 


 
Since 2000, the Disability Rights Education and Defense Fund has collected 
country-based laws that protect the rights of individuals with disabilities. 
DREDF is providing this collection of laws and summaries in order to foster 
sharing of information and encourage the international dialogue on disability 
anti-discrimination. We have made every effort to collect up-to-date and 
accurate information based on existing written and Internet sources, but we make 
no guarantee, undertaking or warranty regarding the accuracy, completeness or 
currency of the materials published herein. In all cases, users are referred to 
official legislative and parliamentary publications for the original legal texts 
and language. Go to the complete collection. 
 


 


Zimbabwe

DISABLED PERSONS ACT, 1992 

To make provision for the welfare and rehabilitation of disabled persons; to 
provide for the appointment and functions of a Director for Disabled Persons' 
Affairs and the establishment and functions of a National Disability Board; and 
to provide for matters connected with or incidental to the foregoing.

 

ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
 
1. Short title.

2. Interpretation.

3. Director for Disabled Persons' Affairs.

4. National Disability Board.

5. Functions of Board.

6. Reports of Board.

7. Adjustment orders by Board.

8. Prohibition of denial to disabled persons of access to public premises, 
services and amenities.

9. Prohibition of discrimination against disabled persons in employment.

10. Offences and penalty.

11. Regulations.

ENACTED by the President and the Parliament of Zimbabwe.

1. This Act may be cited as the Disabled Persons Act, 1992.

2. In this Act-

"Board" means the National Disability Board established in terms of section 
four,

"Director" means the Director for Disabled Persons' Affairs referred to in 
section three;

"disabled person" means a person with a physical, mental or sensory disability, 
including a visual, hearing or speech functional disability, which gives rise to 
physical, cultural or social barriers inhibiting him from participating at an 
equal level with other members of society in activities, undertakings or fields 
of employment that are open to other members of society,

"Minister" means the Minister of Labour, Manpower Planning and Social Welfare or 
any other Minister to whom the President may from time to time assign the 
administration of this Act.

3. (1) There shall e a Director for Disabled Persons' Affairs whose office shall 
be a public office and part of the Public Service.

(2) The functions of the Director shall be

(a) to formulate proposals for measures referred to in paragraph (b) of 
subsection (1) of section five for submission to the Board:

(b) through liaison with the Ministries and local and other authorities 
involved, to secure the implementation of measures which have been recommended 
by the Board in terms of paragraph (b) of subsection (1) of section five and 
approved by the Minister;

(c) to co-ordinate the activities of institutions, associations and 
organisations concerned with the welfare and rehabilitation of disabled persons;

(d) to do such other things as may be prescribed by or in terms of this Act.

(2) In the performance of his functions, the Director shall comply with any 
general directions or instructions that the Minister or the Board may give him.

4. (1) There is hereby established a board to be known as the National 
Disability Board which shall consist of

(a) the Director, ex officio; and

(b) ten members appointed by the Minister from a panel of names submitted to him 
by organisations or associations which he considers represent disabled persons., 
and

(c) one member appointed by the Minister in consultation with the Minister 
responsible for local government; and

(d) one member appointed by the Minister in consultation with the Minister 
responsible for health: and

(e) one member appointed by the Minister in consultation with the Minister 
responsible for education: and

(f) one member appointed by the Minister from a list of not fewer than three 
persons submitted by an association or organisation which the Minister, in 
consultation with the Minister responsible for the administration of the Labour 
Relations Act, 1985 (No. 16 of 1985), considers represents employers in 
Zimbabwe; and

(g) one member appointed by the Minister from a list of not fewer than three 
persons submitted by an association or organisation which the Minister, in 
consultation with the Minister responsible for the administration of the Labour 
Relations Act, 1985 (No. 16 of 1985), considers represents trade unions in 
Zimbabwe.. and

(h) one member appointed by the Minister from among the persons employed in his 
Ministry; and

(i) a member or members co-opted by the Board after consultation with the 
Minister:

Provided that the membership of the Board shall not exceed twenty.

(2) If any organisation or association referred to in paragraph (b), (f) or (g) 
of subsection (1) fails to submit a list of persons within a reasonable time 
after being called upon by the Minister to do so, the Minister may appoint as 
members in terms of the paragraph concerned any person whom he considers will 
adequately represent the interests of the organisation or association which 
failed to submit the list.

(3) The Minister shall appoint as chairman and deputy chairman of the Board two 
of the members referred to in paragraph (b) of subsection (1), and the deputy 
chairman shall exercise the functions of chairman during any period the chairman 
is unable to do so.

(4) Members of the Board shall hold office for such period not exceeding five 
years and on such terms and conditions, whether in relation to remuneration or 
otherwise, as may be prescribed or as the Minister may fix for members 
generally:

Provided that a member in the full-time employment of the State, a statutory 
body or a local authority shall not be entitled to any remuneration in respect 
of his membership of the Board.

(5) Subject to subsection (6), the Board shall

(a) hold its meetings at such times and places and in accordance with such 
procedure; and

(b) keep and furnish to the Minister such records of its meetings;

as may be prescribed or as may be directed by the Minister.

(6) At any meeting of the Board a majority of its members shall constitute a 
quorum.

(7) The Minister may assign persons employed in his Ministry to perform such 
secretarial and administrative functions in connection with the Board as may be 
necessary for the performance of its functions.

5. (1) The functions of the Board shall be-

  to issue adjustment orders in terms of section seven and


(b) to formulate and develop measures and policies designed

(i) to achieve equal opportunities for disabled persons by ensuring, so far as 
possible, that they obtain education and employment, participate fully in 
sporting, recreation and cultural activities and are afforded full access to 
community and social services.,

(ii) to enable disabled persons, so far as possible to lead independent lives;

(iii) to give effect to any international treaty or agreement relating to the 
welfare or rehabilitation of disabled persons to which Zimbabwe is a party.,

(iv) to prevent discrimination against disabled persons resulting from or 
arising out of their disability.

(v) to encourage and put into operation schemes and projects for the employment 
of or generation of income by disabled persons who are unable to secure 
employment elsewhere;

(vi) to encourage and secure the rehabilitation of disabled persons within their 
own communities and social environment:

(vii) to encourage and secure the establishment of vocational rehabilitation 
centres. Social employment centres and other institutions and services for the 
welfare and rehabilitation of disabled persons,

(vii) to co-ordinate services provided in Zimbabwe for the welfare and 
rehabilitation of disabled persons; (ix) to register-

A. disabled persons; and

B. Institutions, associations and organisations, including those controlled and 
managed by the State and local authorities. that provide services for the 
rehabilitation of disabled persons; and

C. places at which services for the rehabilitation of disabled persons are 
provided.

(X) to provide, so far as possible, orthopaedic appliances and other equipment 
to disabled persons,

(xi) to provide, so far as possible, all institutions. associations and 
organisations concerned with the welfare and rehabilitation of disabled persons, 
including institutions. associations and organisations controlled and managed by 
the State and local authorities, with access to available information and 
technical assistance:

(xii) to provide, so far as possible, skilled staff for the successful 
implementation of measures for the welfare and rehabilitation of disabled 
persons:

(xiii) generally. to improve the social and economic status and condition of 
disabled persons and to advance their interests;

(c) to estimate. and report to the Minister on, the likely cost of proposed 
measures for the welfare and rehabilitation of disabled persons and to advise 
the Minister on the relative priorities to be given to the implementation of 
those measures; and

(d) to keep measures for the welfare and rehabilitation of disabled persons 
under constant review and to re-assess and evaluate those measures in the light 
of experience; and

(e) to perform such other functions in relation to the welfare and 
rehabilitation of disabled persons as may be prescribed.

(2) Subject to subsection (3), the Board shall have power to do all things that 
are necessary or convenient co be done for or in connection with the performance 
of its functions and, in particular-

  may conduct inquiries, including public inquiries, into any matter 
  reintegrating to the welfare and rehabilitation of disabled persons;


  may appoint committees consisting of such persons. whether or not they are 
  members of the Board, and on such terms and conditions, as the Board may 
  determine;


(c) may vest in or impose on any committee appointed in terms of paragraph (b) 
such of the functions of the Board as the Board, with the approval of the 
Minister. may determine;

(d) may, on behalf of the State, engage or make other arrangements with any 
other person to carry out research for, or supply information or make 
submissions to, the Board on any matter relating to the welfare and 
rehabilitation of disabled persons.

(3) The Board shall not incur any expenditure on behalf of the State except with 
the approval of the Minister given with the concurrence of the Minister 
responsible for finance.

6. (1) The Board-

(a) shall submit to the Minister such reports as the Minister may require., and

(b) may submit to the Minister such other reports as the Board considers 
advisable;

in regard to any matter relating to the welfare and rehabilitation of disabled 
persons.

(2) The Minister may lay a report submitted to him by the Board in terms of 
subsection (1) before Parliament.

7. (1) This section shall apply to any-

(a) premises to which members of the public are ordinarily admitted, whether on 
payment of a fee or otherwise., and

(b) services or amenities ordinarily provided to members of the public:

including premises owned or services or amenities provided by any statutory 
corporation or local authority.

(2) Where the Board considers that any premises, services or amenities referred 
to in subsection (1) are inaccessible to disabled persons by reason of any 
structural, physical, administrative or other impediment to such access, the 
Board may, subject to this section, serve upon tile owner of the premises or the 
provider of the service or amenity concerned an adjustment order

(a) setting out

(i) a full description of the premises service or amenity concerned; and

(ii) the grounds upon which the Board considers that the premises. service or 
amenity is inaccessible to disabled persons; and

(b) requiring the owner or provider concerned to undertake at his own expense 
such action as may be specified in order to secure reasonable access by disabled 
persons to the premises, service or amenity concerned; and

(c) stipulating the period within which the action referred to in paragraph (b) 
shall be commenced and completed.

(3) Before serving an order in terms of subsection (2) the Board shall serve 
notice upon the person concerned

(a) specifying the grounds upon which the adjustment order is to be issued and 
the nature of the action which the Board considers necessary to rectify the 
situation which has given rise to the proposed order: and

(b) stipulating the maximum period that the Board reasonable for the 
implementation of the action it proposes to order; and

(c) calling upon the person concerned, if he wishes to make representations, to 
make them to the Board within thirty days from the date of the service of the 
notice.

(4) After considering any representations made in terms of subsection (3), the 
Board may issue, or refrain from or defer issuing, an adjustment order.

(5) A person upon whom an adjustment order is served in terms of subsection (2) 
may, within thirty days of the service of the adjustment order, appeal to the 
Administrative Court against such order on the ground that

(a) the person concerned cannot reasonably be expected to bear the whole or any 
part of the expense required in implementing the adjustment order; or

(b) the period stipulated for implementing the adjustment order is unreasonable; 
or

(c) the nature of the action required to be taken in terms of the adjustment 
order is, in the circumstances of the case. unreasonable: or

(d) adequate access to the premises, service or amenity concerned may be secured 
without recourse to the action required by the adjustment order,

or on any other ground.

(6) Upon hearing an appeal---terms of subsection (5) the Administrative Court 
may

(a) confirm, vary or set aside the adjustment order appealed against., and

(b) make such order as to the costs of the appeal as it thinks fit.

(7) The Board shall not serve an adjustment order in terms of subsection (2) 
upon

(a) any hospital, nursing home or clinic controlled or managed by the State or 
registered in terms of the Medical, Dental and Allied Professions Act [Chapter 
224] or the Psychological Practices Act [Chapter 2251, except with the consent 
of the Minister responsible for health;

(b) any school or educational or training institution controlled or managed by 
the State or registered in terms of the Education Act, 1987 (No. 5 of 1987), or 
the Manpower Planning and Development Act, 1984 (No. 36 of 1984), except with 
the consent of the Minister responsible for the administration of the 
institution or Act concerned.

8. (1) No disabled person shall. on the ground of his disability alone, be 
denied-

(a) admission into any premises to which members of the public are ordinarily 
admitted; or ?

(b) the provision of any service or amenity ordinarily provided to members of 
the public.

unless such denial is motivated by a genuine concern for the safety of the 
disabled person concerned.

(2) The proprietor of a premises referred to in paragraph (a) of subsection (1) 
shall not have the right on the ground of a person's disability alone to reserve 
right of admission to his premises against such a person.

(3) A disabled person who is denied admission into any premises or the provision 
of any service or amenity in terms of subsection (1) shall be deemed to have 
suffered an injury and shall have the right to recover damages in any court of 
competent jurisdiction.

9. (1) Subject to subsection (2), no employer shall discriminate against any 
disabled person in relation to-?

  the advertisement of employment, or


(b) the recruitment for employment; or

(c) the creation, classification or abolition of jobs or posts; or

(d) the determination or allocation of wages, salaries, pensions, accommodation. 
leave or other such benefits, or

(e) the choice of persons for jobs or posts, training, advancement. 
apprenticeships, transfer, promotion or, retrenchment; or

(f) the provision of facilities related to or connected with employment. or

(g) any other matter related to employment.

(2) An employer shall not be deemed to have discriminated against a disabled 
person in terms of subsection (1) if-

(a) the act or omission alleged to constitute the discrimination was not wholly 
or mainly attributable to the disability of the disabled person. or

(b) the disability in question was a relevant consideration in relation to the 
particular requirements of the employment concerned; or

(c) special facilities or modifications. whether physical or administrative or 
otherwise. are required at the work place to accommodate the disabled person 
which the employer cannot reasonably be expected to provide.

(3) Subsection (4) of section 5 of the Labour Relations Act, 1985, shall apply 
to a disabled person discriminated against in relation to any matter specified 
in subsection (1).

10. 
Any person who-

  fails to comply with an adjustment order served in terms of section seven; or


(b) wilfully denies to a disabled person, on the ground of his disability alone

(i) admission to any premises to which members of the public are ordinarily 
admitted; or

(ii) the provision of any service or amenity ordinarily provided to members of 
the public;

for any reason other than one motivated by a genuine concern for the safety of 
the disabled person concerned;

or

(c) discriminates against a disabled person in relation to the matters specified 
in subsection (1) of section nine: Provided that paragraph (a). (b) or (c) of 
subsection (2) of that section shall avail as a defence to a charge in terms of 
this section,

shall be guilty of an offence and liable to a fine not exceeding four thousand 
dollars or to imprisonment for a period not exceeding one year or to both such 
fine and such imprisonment.

11. (1) Subject to this Act and any other enactment, the Minister. after 
consultation with the Board, may make regulations providing for

  the co-ordination of services provided in Zimbabwe for the welfare or 
  rehabilitation of disabled persons;


  (b) the registration of

  (i) disabled persons,

  (ii) institutions, associations and organisations, including those controlled 
  and managed by the State and local authorities, that provide services for the 
  rehabilitation of disabled persons;

  (iii) places at which services for the rehabilitation of disabled persons are 
  provided;


  effect to be given to Zimbabwe's obligations under any international 
  convention treaty or agreement concerning disabled persons;


(d) any other matter which in terms of this Act is required or permitted to be 
prescribed.

(2) The Minister shall not make regulations in terms of subsection (1) providing 
for the registration of

  any hospital, nursing home or clinic controlled or managed by the State or 
  registered in terms of the Medical, Dental and Allied Professions Act [Chapter 
  224] or the Psychological Practices Act [Chapter 2251, except with the consent 
  of the Minister responsible for health;


(b) any school or educational or training institution controlled or managed by 
the State or registered in terms of the Education Act, 1987 (No. 5 of 1987), or 
the Manpower Planning and Development Act, 1984 (No. 36 of 1984), except with 
the consent of the Minister responsible for the administration of the 
institution or Act concerned.


 
 


 
Since 2000, the Disability Rights Education and Defense Fund has collected 
country-based laws that protect the rights of individuals with disabilities. 
DREDF is providing this collection of laws and summaries in order to foster 
sharing of information and encourage the international dialogue on disability 
anti-discrimination. We have made every effort to collect up-to-date and 
accurate information based on existing written and Internet sources, but we make 
no guarantee, undertaking or warranty regarding the accuracy, completeness or 
currency of the materials published herein. In all cases, users are referred to 
official legislative and parliamentary publications for the original legal texts 
and language. Go to the complete collection. 
 


 

